# Gnar Country

## Publication notes

by Steven Kotler (Originally published 2023)

[Gnar Country](https://www.amazon.com/Gnar-Country-Growing-Old-Staying/dp/0063272903/)

## The Rules

### Rule 1: Always follow the rules

Remove emotion from the equation. How you feel in the moment matters far less than how you feel later. The moment lasts a moment, hindsight lasts a lifetime. In high-risk situations, the brain becomes logical and linear. Short-term thinking dominates. Creativity decreases. Choices are limited. And this does not always produce the best outcomes. If you can't keep your word to yourself, then you can't trust yourself, and self-confidence is reflected in everything from perceptual bias to levels of intrinsic movement. If you keep promises to yourself, self-confidence never wavers, motivation becomes momentum, and flow becomes a regular occurrence. The result: you go farther faster and with a lot less fuss. If you consistently break your word to yourself, once you set a goal, your brain immediately starts hunting for an easy way out.

### Rule Two: Find a training partner you can trust

You are who you spend time with. Find something in your sweet-spot of risk/reward - someone better than you but not so far ahead that you are over-challenged trying to keep up.

### Rule Three: If they can do it, so can you

If fear is emotionally interfering with performance, back off. If exhaustion is affecting performance, back off. Aim for slow and steady progress. These guidelines ensure progress that does not lead to catastrophic injury.

### Rule Four: Trust your neurochemistry

List to your internal signals. If you feel it, move quickly. Dopamine generated by pattern recognition doesn't last long. While it's around, it amplifies everything from courage to focus to fast-twitch muscle response. That window is the best opportunity for success.

### Rule Five: Figure out who you are and how to learn

Be yourself!

### Rule Six: Hesitation is never your friend

Hesitation opens the door to fear. Anxiety produces adrenaline, which burns a lot of calories and saps energy levels. The more tired you are, the worse you perform. Stopping to think gives the voice in your head time to voice it's opinion.

### Rule Seven: Flow first, friends second

If someone else can't keep up, you don't wait for them. It's not personal. It's psycological. The goal is to get into flow - flow keeps you calm, and effective. Health, happiness, and overall well-being increase.

### Rule Eight: Emotions are tools

Use hormones to increase energy, amp up focus, and drive flow. Curiosity and anger can generate testosterone and prep the body for the fight to come. All neurochemicals work this way. Use emotions to generate neurochemistry, which offers a faster path toward mastery. Roar!

### Rule Nine: Never waste a flow state

Flow amplifies our ability to do, as well as our ability to remember what we did (so we can do it again later). When in flow, push yourself, take chances, and learn new skills. Protect your flow state against all intruders (phones, alerts, emails, etc.)

### Rule Ten: Train like a pro, recover like a pro

Train like a professional athlete. Focus on **strength, stamina, agility, balance, and flexibility**. Old age demands constant attention on all of these categories. Recovery must include high-quality nutrition, constant hydration, an abundance of anti-inflammatory supplements, tons of sleep, and limited (preferably zero) booze. Active recovery is part of this protocol (long walks, yoga).

### Rule Eleven: Grit is the last resort

Grit is a limited resource. Grit links to willpower, which declines throughout the course of a day. Willpower is highest in the morning when we're fresh from sleep. It dwindles during the day, as we expend energy. Conserve this fuel for when we need it most. Relying on grit all the time is a recipe for burnout. When faced with a challenge, instead of trying to be gritty, fight back with the big five intrinsic motivators:

- curiosity
- passion
- purpos
- autonomy
- mastery

It's okay to _deliberately play_!

### Rule Twelve: Get paid to grow old

Train your body and brain to take full advantage of the superpowers that arise with age.

### Rule Thirteen: Consider the gnar

Push yourself. Do things outside your comfort zone. The next time the voice in your head says "You're too old for this shit" --remember, the voice is lying. Action is an antiaging medicine.
